Add documentation (#65)
precice/fenicsx-adapter: docs/README.md

---
title: The FEniCSx adapter
permalink: adapter-fenicsx.html
keywords: adapter, fenicsx
summary: "A general adapter for the open source computing platform FEniCSx"
---

## What is FEniCS

From the FEniCS Project website: _FEniCS is a popular open-source computing platform for solving partial differential equations (PDEs) with the finite element method (FEM). FEniCS enables users to quickly translate scientific models into efficient finite element code. With the high-level Python and C++ interfaces to FEniCS, it is easy to get started, but FEniCS offers also powerful capabilities for more experienced programmers. FEniCS runs on a multitude of platforms ranging from laptops to high-performance computers._ More details can be found at [fenicsproject.org](https://fenicsproject.org/).

## How to get FEniCSx

> You can install FEniCSx on your system following the instructions on [fenicsproject.org](https://fenicsproject.org/download/). The simplest way to install FEniCS on Ubuntu is using the official PPA repository of FEniCS:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Install FEniCSx on your system following the instructions on [fenicsproject.org](https://fenicsproject.org/download/).
```

```bash
sudo add-apt-repository ppa:fenics-packages/fenics
sudo apt update
sudo apt install fenicsx
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## Aim of this adapter

> This adapter supports the Python interface of FEniCSx and offers an API that allows the user to use FEniCSx-style data structures for solving coupled problems. It is an update of the [FEniCS adapter](https://precice.org/adapter-fenics.html) featuring similar API as the FEniCS adapter but with support of FEniCSx and new features of preCICE. The FEniCS solvers for the heat transport and conjugate heat transfer examples have been adapted for FEniCSx and FEniCSx-preCICE and serve as usage examples. However, the adapter is designed in a general fashion and can be used to couple any code using the FEniCS library.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This adapter supports the Python interface of FEniCSx and offers an API that allows the user to use FEniCSx-style data structures for solving coupled problems. It is an update to the [FEniCS adapter](https://precice.org/adapter-fenics.html) featuring an API similar to the FEniCS adapter, with support for FEniCSx and new preCICE features. The FEniCS solvers for the heat transport and conjugate heat transfer examples have been adapted for FEniCSx and serve as usage examples. However, the adapter is designed in a general fashion and can be used to couple any code using the FEniCS library.
```

## How to install the adapter

> The adapter requires FEniCSx and preCICE version 3.3.0 or greater and the preCICE language bindings for Python.

Reviewer: Instead of writing a sentence, please list out dependencies and their required versions. Also, `dolfinx` and more need to be listed here.

### Use `pip`

> The adapter is [published on PyPI](https://pypi.org/project/fenicsxprecice/). After installing preCICE and the python language bindings, run `pip3 install --user fenicsxprecice` to install the adapter via your Python package manager.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Install the adapter using pip

```bash
pip install fenicsxprecice
```
```

> The adapter can also be installed manually. First, the FEniCSx-preCICE adapter mut be cloned from the [GitHub repository](https://github.com/precice/fenicsx-adapter). Then, navigate to the cloned repository on your local machine and run `pip3 install --user .` in the root path of the repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The adapter can also be installed manually. First, the FEniCSx-preCICE adapter must be cloned from the [GitHub repository](https://github.com/precice/fenicsx-adapter). Then navigate to the cloned repository on your local machine and run `pip3 install .` from the repository root.
```

## Examples for coupled codes

The following tutorials can be used as a usage example for the FEniCSx adapter:

* Solving the heat equation in a partitioned fashion (heat equation solved via FEniCSx for both participants)

> * Flow over plate (heat equation solved via FEniCSx for solid participant)

Reviewer: These should eventually become links to the tutorials repository.

Author: I added the links to the respective tutorials even though the fenicsx solvers are not added. Should the links point explicitly to the subdirectories where fenicsx solvers are located or is the current solution sufficient?

Reviewer: > Should the links point explicitly to the subdirectories where fenicsx solvers are located or is the current solution sufficient?

Lets point to the subdirectories with the FEniCSx-based solvers.

For more details please consult the references given in the [reference section](#related-literature).

## How can I use my own solver with the adapter

> The FEniCSx adapter does not couple your code out-of-the-box, but you have to call the adapter API from within your code. You can use the tutorials from above as an example. The basic API of the adapter and the design is explained in the [reference paper](#how-to-cite). For more information about the purpose of each function provided by the FEniCSx adapter, you can refer to the respective Python docstrings within the [code](https://github.com/precice/fenicsx-adapter/blob/develop/fenicsxprecice/fenicsxprecice.py).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The adapter exposes an API that must be called in a script using FEniCSx. Look at the tutorials from above as an example. For more information about the purpose of each function provided by the FEniCSx adapter, you can refer to the respective Python docstrings within the [code](https://github.com/precice/fenicsx-adapter/blob/develop/fenicsxprecice/fenicsxprecice.py).
```

## You need more information?

Please don't hesitate to ask questions about the FEniCSx adapter on [discourse](https://precice.discourse.group/) or in [Matrix]({{ site.matrix_url }}).

## How to cite

If you are using our adapter, please consider citing our paper:

> > **Vinnitchenko, N., Desai, I., Rodenberg, B., Hildebrand, P., Uekermann, B., & Humbert, A.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Vinnitchenko, N., Desai, I., Rodenberg, B., Hildebrand, P., Humbert, A. & Uekermann, B.**
```

> _FEniCSx-preCICE: Coupling FEniCSx to other simulation software._
> **SoftwareX**, Volume TODO, Year 2026, Pages TODO.
> [DOI/TODO](https://precice.org) | [URL/TODO](https://precice.org)

## Related literature

> **Rodenberg, B., Desai, I., Hertrich, R., Jaust, A., & Uekermann, B.**
> _FEniCS–preCICE: Coupling FEniCS to other simulation software._
> **SoftwareX**, Volume 16, Elsevier, 2021.

> > [DOI: 10.1016/j.softx.2021.1001072](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.softx.2021.1001072) | [Publisher's page](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2352711021001072)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> [DOI: 10.1016/j.softx.2021.1001072](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.softx.2021.1001072)
```
DOI is enough here, no need to link to the publisher's website.

---
title: The FEniCSx adapter
permalink: adapter-fenicsx.html

> keywords: adapter, fenicsx

Reviewer: ```suggestion
keywords: adapter, fenicsx, dolfinx, finite element method
```

summary: "A general adapter for the open source computing platform FEniCSx"
---

## What is FEniCS

From the FEniCS Project website: _FEniCS is a popular open-source computing platform for solving partial differential equations (PDEs) with the finite element method (FEM). FEniCS enables users to quickly translate scientific models into efficient finite element code. With the high-level Python and C++ interfaces to FEniCS, it is easy to get started, but FEniCS offers also powerful capabilities for more experienced programmers. FEniCS runs on a multitude of platforms ranging from laptops to high-performance computers._ More details can be found at [fenicsproject.org](https://fenicsproject.org/).

## How to get FEniCSx

Install FEniCSx on your system following the instructions on [fenicsproject.org](https://fenicsproject.org/download/).

## Aim of this adapter

> This adapter supports the Python interface of FEniCSx and offers an API that allows the user to use FEniCSx-style data structures for solving coupled problems. It is an update to the [FEniCS adapter](https://precice.org/adapter-fenics.html) featuring an API similar to the FEniCS adapter, with support for FEniCSx and new preCICE features. The FEniCS solvers for the heat transport and conjugate heat transfer examples have been adapted for FEniCSx and FEniCSx-preCICE and serve as usage examples. However, the adapter is designed in a general fashion and can be used to couple any code using the FEniCS library.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This adapter supports the Python interface of FEniCSx and offers an API that allows the user to use FEniCSx-style data structures for solving coupled problems. It is an update to the [FEniCS adapter](https://precice.org/adapter-fenics.html) featuring a similar API, with support for FEniCSx and new preCICE features. The FEniCS solvers for the heat transport and conjugate heat transfer examples have been adapted for FEniCSx and FEniCSx-preCICE and serve as usage examples. However, the adapter is designed in a general fashion and can be used to couple any code using the FEniCS library.
```

## How to install the adapter

Required dependencies
| Name                      | Version   |
|---------------------------|-----------|
| preCICE                   | >=3.3.0   |
| preCICE python bindings   | >=3.3.0   |
| precice adapter schema    | >=0.4.1   |
| dolfinx                   | >=0.10    |
| basix                     | >=0.10    |
| FFCx                      | >=0.10    |
| UFL                       | >=2025.2.0|
| mpi4py                    | >=3.16    |
| numpy                     | >=1.26.4  |

### Use `pip`

Install the adapter using pip with

```bash
pip install fenicsxprecice
```

> The adapter can also be installed manually. First, the FEniCSx-preCICE adapter must be cloned from the [GitHub repository](https://github.com/precice/fenicsx-adapter). Then navigate to the cloned repository on your local machine and run `pip3 install --user .` from the repository root.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The adapter can also be installed manually. First, the FEniCSx-preCICE adapter must be cloned from the [GitHub repository](https://github.com/precice/fenicsx-adapter). Then navigate to the cloned repository on your local machine and run `pip install .` from the repository root.
```
